In the previous lecture, we've seen an exact
algorithm that calculates the chromatic number
of a graph, it always gives the optimal answer.
However, it's slow, very slow. This is why we may
want a fast algorithm for this problem, even
if it doesn't always give the optimal answer.
This is what we will see in this lecture, the
greedy algorithm for finding the chromatic number.
Imagine that we start coloring vertices one
by one, by following an arbitrary order.
Ideally, we want to color all the vertices
with one color. But, when coloring,
we can be on a vertex that has a neighbor already
colored with that color, so we cannot use it.
In that case, we're obliged to add a new color,
we now have two colors that can be used. We
keep coloring, then we find a vertex whose
neighbors used both colors, we can't use them.
In that case, we're obliged to add a new color, we
now have three colors. And it continues like that.
So the idea is: for each vertex, we use the first
available color among ones we used for previous
vertices. And if all of them are not available,
we're obliged to add a new one. And so on.
At the end, we can check the number
of colors we used, we can find 2,
we can find 4, it depends on the graph and
the order we used to traverse the vertices.
And that's the idea of the greedy algorithm,
it's greedy because for each vertex we color,
we try to do the optimal move, which is to not add
a new color, to use as least colors as possible.
Let's apply this process on the
example of the last lecture to
better understand and see what happens,
do we get the optimal result or not.
Let's keep same order of traversal. Initially,
we have only one color to use, let's say red.
Vertex G, can we use red? Yes, no neighbor has the
color red. Next vertex, B. Can we use red? Yes,
no neighbor has the color red. Next vertex, I. Can
we use red? Yes, no neighbor has the color red.
Next vertex, E. Can we use red? No, it's already
used from its neighbors. So here we need a new
color, let's say blue, and we assign it
to E. Next vertex, A. Can we use red? No,
it's used by B. Can we use blue? No, it's
used by E. Again, we need to add a new color,
let's say green, and we assign it to A. Then we
have H. Can we use red? No. Can we use blue? Yes.
Next vertex, F. Can we use red? No. Blue? No.
Green? No. No more colors, so we need to add a
new one, let's say purple, and we assign it to
F. Next vertex, C. Red is used, but blue isn't,
we assign blue. Last vertex, D. Red is used, blue
is used, but green is not, we assign it to C.
And we finished our coloring, we
colored the graph with 4 colors.
But wait, in the previous lecture we found 3, we
could color the graph with only 3 colors. Yes,
you're right, but as said earlier, the greedy
algorithm is an approximation algorithm,
finding the optimal value isn't guaranteed.
Okay we know that greedy coloring doesn't always
give the optimal value, but how bad is it? First
of all, the traversal order of vertices can affect
the number of colors used. Small example, we have
this four-vertices path graph. if we traverse
vertices in this order, ABCD, only 2 colors
are used, optimal number. But if we traverse
them in this order, ADBC, 3 colors are used.
And we have two types of graphs: well-colored
graphs and not well-colored graphs.
Well-colored graphs are graphs with which
greedy coloring always gives the same result,
no matter the order of traversal. And it gives the
optimal number, the chromatic number. We can say
that the Grundy number of a well-colored
graph is equal to the chromatic number.
The Grundy number of a graph is the maximum
number of colors that can be used when applying
greedy coloring on it, you can understand it as
the worst case result of greedy coloring on it.
Examples of well-colored graphs are complete
graphs, where we always get n no matter the order,
or complete bipartite graphs, where we
always get 2 no matter the order. And you
can see that n and 2 are the optimal results
for these two types of graphs respectively.
But we also have graphs that are not
well-colored, with which the order has an impact,
like the small example we've seen. An example
where order of traversal is much more visible
is with crown graphs. Let's take a crown graph of
8 vertices. A crown graph is an undirected graph
of 2n vertices whose vertices can be divided
into two sets A and B of size n, such that
there is an edge between each two vertices ai
and bj if i isn't equal to j. In other terms,
for each vertex ai, there is an edge between ai
and every vertex in the set B except one, bi.
In this crown graph of 8 vertices,
A contains a0, a1, a2, and a3,
B contains b0, b1, b2, and b3, and the edges
condition is verified, for example with a2,
there is an edge between it and b0, b1, b3,
but no edge with b2 because i and j are equal.
If we follow this order, we get a
greedy coloring that uses 2 colors only.
But if we follow the order a0, b0, a1, b1, and so
on until a3, b3, greedy coloring uses 4 colors.
And in the general case, we have an order
that uses only 2 colors, the optimal number,
it's the best case. But in the worst
case, by following the order a0, b0,
a1, b1, ..., an-1, bn-1, greedy
coloring uses |V|/2 colors,
so for example with a crown graph of 100 vertices,
in the worst case greedy coloring uses 50 colors,
horrible. We can say that the Grundy
number of a crown graph is |V|/2.
In brief, greedy coloring can
find the optimal number of colors,
it's even guaranteed for well-colored graphs like
complete graphs and complete bipartite graphs,
but it can also give a poor result because of a
bad order of traversal. For well-colored graphs,
we have no problem, but for others, the order
has an impact, so we want to choose a good order.
And there always exists an order that gives the
optimal number of colors when applying greedy
coloring by following it, however, finding that
order is an NP-hard problem, back to the initial
slowness problem we had. But, what we can do is to
use heuristics to find let's say a better order,
not necessarily the perfect one, but an order
that will probably give a better result than
the order we randomly choose as we did in
this lecture. This is why after this lecture,
we will see some heuristics, like Welsh-Powell
and DSatur. But before, we forgot an important
thing in this lecture, implementing the greedy
coloring algorithm. As parameters we need the
graph only. Then we need the order of vertices we
will use. For now we're randomly choosing one, so
let's just take the list of keys of the adjacency
list as it is, same as with the previous lecture.
We also need color map, a hash map where
the default value is -1, -1 means uncolored.
Now we start coloring. For each vertex in the
order, we need to find the first available color.
Colors will be represented
by integers, 0, 1, and so on.
How to find the next available color?
First we need to know what colors are
used by our neighbors, for that we use the
same instruction as in the last lecture,
we extract the color used by each neighbor
of the actual vertex and put them in a set.
Second part of the process, we
start from the first color, 0,
and while it's used by one of the neighbors, we
move to the next one by incrementing. We write,
color equal to 0, then while color is in used, we
increment color. Doing so will automatically move
to a new color if all previously used ones
are used by neighbors of the actual vertex.
After we find the available color, we assign
it to our vertex in the color map. And after we
color all vertices, we can either return color map
if we want to know how we colored the vertices,
or if we just want the number of colors we used,
we return the maximum color given to a vertex in
color map + 1, because if the max color is 3 for
example then we used 4 colors, as in the example.
What about the time complexity? We're
first making the order, the cost is |V|.
Then we have a loop that is traversing the |V|
vertices. For each vertex, we're traversing its
neighbors to find used colors, the cost is the
degree of the vertex. Then we're looping until
we find an available color. The worst case is
when each neighbor has a unique color, in which
case we need to perform degree of u iterations
before finding the color, so the cost is deg(u).
We have the sum of 2*deg(u) for each vertex u.
Remember that the sum of deg(u) represents the
sum of degrees of vertices, which
is 2|E| in an undirected graph.
In total, we get |V|+4|E|, which gives an
O(|V|+|E|) time complexity, greedy coloring
runs in linear time, way faster than the algorithm
of the previous lecture. We've reached the end of
this lecture where we've learnt about greedy
coloring, in the next one, we will discuss
some heuristics to improve how it chooses the
order it traverses, see you in the next lecture.